Tracking Sir Donald Riggs, E. Riggs.
What's your title now?
I'm the Dean of the University Library.
Uh-huh.
And you've had a couple of things that you've done here, right?
Are you moving to another position, I guess?
I'm going over to the School of Information in January.
I've been here six years.
This is the first job, except for one, and I've stayed more than five years.
Really?
Yeah.
At Arizona State where we built five new libraries and added 112 new positions, I stayed 11 and a half years.
But could you tell me a little bit about what the new duties will involve?
Well, I will be teaching courses in library leadership and academic libraries and advanced management.
How do you feel about, I mean, it is kind of a, of course Michigan is
considered one of the innovators, right?
This digital library and stuff.
How do you feel about that?
Let's just start over the very general entry.
Well, we have the, this library has one of the better collections in many areas.
Collections of what?
Well, for example, research collections.
We have the best mathematics collection.
We have the best dentistry, academic dentistry library collection.
We have one of the better
Faulkner collections.
And we have, right Toby?
Our Japanese collection is about the second best.
So when I came here, one of the things I wanted to do was create an environment whereby we could take a leadership role in digitizing library materials and also work with corporations.
And for example, we're working with the Mellon Foundation.
We're digitizing ten
social science, well, 10 history and economics journals from 1990 all the way back.
And Bill Bowen, who used to be the president of the Princeton University, and has taken a very keen interest in this area.
So, we're doing that work here at Michigan.
Right.
And, um, we're going.
Go ahead.
We're working with, on this sheet, with the Cornell University and digitizing about 5,000
volumes of classics between 1850 and 1950, those items which are no longer protected by copyright.
Right.
So I was telling you, Kobe, copyright is the key.
Exactly.
Kobe said, why are they picking such and such a date?
I said, I don't know, but my sense is,
There's no copyright problem there.
That's right.
No, I was out at Cornell two weeks ago, so two days there.
So you sold it, probably, at some of it.
I sold a lot of it.
I've been to Stanford and the Waterloo Congress.
I've been to Corvus out in Washington State, so I'm, you know, I'm not... And, of course, everywhere you go, you hear Michigan, and you talk about digitizing books.
Now, at Cornell,
For instance, some of the things they digitize, they then deaccession and get rid of.
What do you people do with things that you digitize?
We haven't gotten rid of anything yet.
Those ten journals which we're sending down to Barbados, actually, to have a digit scan because of the labor.
However, the Mellon Foundation is paying more than the prevailing wage, and Bill Bowen has been challenged on it.
Are you exploiting people in Barbados?
Are they kidding?
I'm sorry.
No, they're not.
No, they're not children.
They're working as equipment.
Right.
So, we have to tear those journals apart, and here's something.
For example, we may only have one copy of the journal, but a place like Harvard may have ten copies of that same title, full background.
So, when we bring it back, we re-bind it.
You do.
Yeah, we do.
At Cornell, when they break them up, I mean, they're going off to
parks unknown, probably the landfill.
I mean, you're aware of that.
Yeah.
What do you think?
Should we keep both?
I think publishers are going to... I don't have a position on this, by the way.
I'm just really interested in, you know, what your attitude is on this.
I think for a while we will probably keep the paper copy as well, Steve.
But eventually we're going to, for example, for our card catalog,
You know, many universities just threw them out, and that person wrote the article for the New Yorker.
Nicholson Baker.
Thank you.
Yeah, I couldn't think of his name.
But when I came, I told my—we had not filed any cards.
I came here in 1991.
We had not filed any cards in the card catalog since 1989 or so.
And I told my faculty group, I'm going to move that card catalog out so we can develop this Knowledge Navigation Center.
And they said, well, give us a couple more years, and so on and so forth.
We moved it down in the basement, took it out of that primary real estate, and we still have our card catalog.
Not one peep out of the faculty here.
That's what they were saying.
They said, some faculty member said, you know, all of my material, most of my material is reflected in the card catalog, and it's not new material, so it won't be online.
I said, well, it will be, but they said, well, we can still access it better, and so on and so forth.
Will we keep the card catalog forever?
I don't think so, Toby.
Well, that happens.
As long as I'm alive.
Well, you have to.
Thanks very much.
As long as I'm alive.
Now, there's a brand new one.
Do you want to call him?
Do you want me to call him now?
Could you?
Maybe you could do that, but then I could, yeah.
And just tell him, I'm asking Stephen to come up here while Toby's here, and we've got this Brodsky collection.
Just here, a little while ago, the story on the Robert Brodsky.
This guy was?
Yeah.
He's missing.
Well,
I'll give him a call.
Okay.
How long are you going to be here, Toby?
Until I leave.
Toby will be back on Monday the 2nd of December.
One of the reasons we are making things happen here as compared with some other universities is the fact that I discovered we couldn't go on this alone.
We don't have the expertise in the library.
So when Elsevier came out with their TULIP project, that's where they took material science journals and put it online.
There were nine universities, I think, involved.
We were able to get the project done faster than the other ones because we engage other people on campus, like our School of Engineering.
And I have one person we lost to the University of Virginia, John Price Wilkins, who is probably the best in the country in the Humanities Tax Initiative.
Anyway, John went down to Charlottesville.
He didn't like it there, and Yale offered him a job, and so I wanted him back here.
I didn't want him to leave in the first place.
Anyway, so I called the dean of the arts and sciences, the director of University Press, and the dean of the library school, and I asked each other, can you give me fifteen thousand dollars to pay toward John's salary?
They'd like if the library didn't come up that much.
And they all said, we'd be happy to do this.
So we're using other people's mothers in a sense.
And this person who you met here a few minutes ago, Wendy Roger, she's employed as our Assistant Director for Digital Library Initiatives, which she's employed, her salary's paid 40% by library, 40% by information technology, and 20% by the School of Information.
So we're using a kind of a, I suppose, a collaborative effort here on campus.
And that's how we're making some of these things happen,
University libraries really don't, on their existing staffs, do not have the expertise.
We need to make these things move.
Now, Cornell was, I couldn't believe how set up they are.
Yeah.
Now, the assistant librarian there, I can't think of his name right now, not Sarah, but the man just immediately beneath her, he said that they have been mandated by their trustees to limit, as of the year 2000, five million books.
Have you heard that?
And that's it.
No more on a campus.
Outrage.
Burn the books.
Undoubtedly, there is pressure.
What are we going to do with all this stuff?
We've got this great technology.
We can scan it.
Who needs the printed book?
It was interesting.
My provost told me, I said, we have 1.6 million volumes in storage, which we can get within 24 hours.
Where do you keep them?
about a mile from here.
What do you call that facility?
Is it just part of the library?
It's called the BUHR, B-U-H-R, that's the name of the building.
BUHR.
I've been to the Harvard Depository, which is about 20 miles out of Cambridge.
Yeah, but this is just down the road, down in Green Street.
Well, we have 1.6 million volumes there, and the provost asked me, when I told him, I said, Bernie, we need more.
We have to expand that area, because
It's my understanding, we have one of the largest acquisitions budgets here.
But since I've been here, I've really pushed that because we also buy our non-print materials out of that, the multimedia resources.
So last year, the University of Michigan got the largest increase of any major research university library in the United States and Canada.
Is that right?
9.1%.
I can show you this.
What's the number?
How much money did you have to spend on acquisitions?
Last year we had...
about $11 million.
This year we'll be going over $12 million.
Really?
Yeah.
That's for the whole university.
Also, last year—I can show you statistics, though—that last year the University of Michigan Library spent more for journals than any other university, including Harvard and Yale and all those.
This university, since I've been here, when I came our budget was $19 million.
Now it's $27 million.
So we've added—and a lot of that's in the accuracy.
I've heard a lot of them resign this year.
And we've got an 8-point this past year.
Well, when we got the 9.1%, the average was something like 3% among research libraries.
And, of course, how do you break that down in terms of, you say, the multimedia stuff has kind of folded into that.
What percentage goes to multimedia?
Yeah, we're up to about, we're up to about, this doesn't sound much, but it's much when you compare federal libraries, about 7% now.
Seven.
Seven percent.
Seven percent of that figure is for...
Non-print.
Non-print things?
Well, I would have expected it to be more than that.
Really?
Yeah, but see, there's no university library is spending, say, ten percent.
Yeah.
And most, I was in a conference... So yours is less, actually.
The lower percentage than most... No, ours is more.
Really?
Yeah.
It's closer to four, four percent.
And some people are not buying any
CD-ROMs and, you know, database, electronic databases out of their budget, out of their materials.
They try to get supplemental funding, but it's only like one time.
We're trying to build it into our base, and administration has it.
Part of the whole project.
We have this one project, this Humanities Tech Initiative.
Let me tell you just how the machine has helped scholarship.
We use a software engine called Pat Lecter.
P-A-T-L-E-C-L-E-C-T-O-R.
It's a hyphenated word?
Yeah, out of the University of Waterloo.
And a professor was showing this one day.
And he was saying, he used four words.
He said, you know, I'm looking to see how many times these four words are connected or strung together.
And the four words are like, in the search of.
Rather simple.
So he sits there, and there are 3,000 old English texts.
1770.
because the machinist did it.
Another part would say, so what, you know?
But I said, is this really important?
But see, that's information, what we talked about again.
That's concordance.
Yeah, and here's what he... Well, you link concordance.
Yeah.
It's one word, right?
Mm-hmm, yeah.
But see, what he was saying, he was saying, for people who study linguistics, that's important, to have those words, I mean, you know.
And I said, but how many... I said, just roughly, what would have taken you, you know, to do it manually?
He said, 17 years.
And if you think about that, that's quite an impact on scholarship.
I don't want to belittle the importance of that, but it's kind of... Well, no, but when we talk about the information age, this is information.
Yes.
Not knowledge.
It's not knowledge.
Right.
It's data.
It's information.
And it's extraordinarily useful.
And I'd be a fool and a hypocrite and say I don't use it myself every day of the year because I do.
That's right.
When I'm asking you for your website, I say I'll do this at home.
Oh, yes.
Why waste valuable time here?
Except you won't be able to do it.
I think you will.
I can do it.
Pretty good.
You might be shocked to learn, Toby.
You're a great computer literate.
You have to be.
Oh, yeah.
You have to be today.
See, this is where the students know more.
At one time, professors could stand up before their students and display their knowledge and all the great classics and, you know, all the great books and all the erotic articles.
Now, these students—the professor said, the students know more than I do, what's on the web.
Isn't that interesting?
Well, I know that.
So, this is where the librarians are going to have to work hard and work with the faculty to get them up to speed, so to speak.
This is, you know, a softball pitch, but what is a librarian's function historically and today, in your view?
It's called information now.
Did you notice the School of Libraries is now called School of Information?
The role of the librarian has been, it's been a multi-role, identifying and ordering, organizing, articulating collections.
Now, the role of the librarian, it still involves that.
librarian serves as a navigator, someone, the navigator for online resources, someone who can, who can identify and seek out and locate and customize information online, you know, for the, for the user.
Before digital, before the digital environment, we would have bibliographic resources.
You can get the author and title.
Now, you can bring that information right to the user's workstation.
And see, I go, I go throughout the country and get speeches on
on universal access to materials and— Is this a specialty of yours?
Mm-hmm.
National—I was just in—I missed Toby's conference.
I was in Prague.
I gave two speeches over there.
One was on human values and the—and cyberspace.
You got a copy of that?
I don't think I have one here, but I can see you.
Would you?
Yeah.
And my other— I'll just have to—I left my cards in my briefcase.
And my other—my other talk was on—
universal access, a digital library, let's not forget the have-nots.
Do you know two, one half of the world's population lives two miles from near his telephone?
Think of it.
One half of the world's population lives two miles from near his telephone.
Think of this.
25% of the public school children who are attending
public schools in the city of Chicago come from homes without telephones.
Now, talking about haves and have-nots, but it's not just a money issue.
In some countries, for example... How many of them are going to have computers, then?
Well, yeah, if they don't have... Maybe the book is more suited for people who are the have-nots.
Maybe this technology does exclude a major... Well, I think, as a matter of fact, it might be one of the most serious problems in our
Civilization, in the future, if you think about my, you know, because the people have access to all this information, it's going to be much farther ahead, I think, and those two do not.
And, but there are other, it's just, I mean, sure, money's one issue, but there are many other issues, too.
In some countries, they don't want you to have access to information.
I mean, they control what you, what they want you to read.
No, you used to be a crime to teach black people how to read.
Exactly.
Yeah, we haven't gone much farther.
Yeah.
I'm sorry, I was off on my track.
That's okay.
How about, you mentioned you have this very aggressive acquisitions program.
How about deaccessions?
You know, and also the librarian, you more or less characterized him or her as a person who marshals and gathers and organizes them.
How about, you know, you have 1.2 million books stored a mile off campus.
Clearly the books you've put out there are books that nobody's using.
Those are books that no one's checked out, say, in the last 10 years.
So you're making a decision there.
We want to keep them.
We don't want to deaccession them.
But then what's the step after that?
Do you decide that there are any collections that haven't been used in 20 or 30 years, that there's nobody teaching, and that maybe we could use that space for something else?
Yeah, we discard.
We have books there.
Yeah, but how about deaccessioning collections?
Do you do that?
You do that?
Yeah.
Can you think of any collections?
Well, we've taken some collections that we have.
We think that should be, that would be better.
Okay.
Thank you very much.
Yeah, this is it.
Sidebars.
You don't tell the donor's family, don't you?
I don't think he's talking about special collection.
No, I'm not talking about a rare collection.
Did you use the word collection?
I did, yeah.
For example, we had some, I think there were some dissertations in Southeast Asia stored out by, what's this airport out here?
I can't think of the name.
Willow Run.
Yeah, Willow Run.
When I heard about it, I said, we don't have access to this.
Let's send those down to the Center for Research Libraries down in, it's a storage facility.
which they specialize in things like that down in Chicago, and they were so happy to get that, because they handle foreign dissertations, and I knew that, so that's an example.
Let me tell you, I didn't finish one story I was going to tell you, and that's when my provost said, why don't we, rather than sending all those building this physical storage facility onto the bureaus to handle these books, why don't we just digitize them?
So we did a real quick cost analysis.
You did.
So you actually looked into this.
We did.
What if we were to take a 300-page book?
How much would it cost to digitize it?
And we came out with something like a cost of about $75.
But those costs are always going down, too.
Well, no.
As a matter of fact, we've discovered that was a conservative cost.
That was based on scanning.
Like $5 a page, something like that?
Yeah.
Well, they said $0.40 a page, I think.
That's not bad.
Cornell's got it down to $0.18 a page now.
But see, the...
The Mellon Foundation is finding out it's costing more than they'd expected, so I don't know what Cornell's getting its figures.
So what are they calling building a better point?
Mm-hmm.
And see, Bill Bowen is the—he's the economist of, you know, he was president of Princeton.
He comes out—this adjacent project, he takes a special interest in.
Anyway, for the same cost, it would cost, you know, for—if we were to digitize 50,000 volumes, we could build
a storage facility that would accommodate a million volumes.
So they'd probably say, well, economics doesn't add up, so forget about digitizing.
But see, but then again... But what if the numbers were right, though?
I wouldn't have any difficulty in digitizing if they're no longer protected.
Now, people like Toby and the faculty would probably be after me, but no.
I mean, if they're not used,
And when that cost comes down to that point, then... But see, you can ask... It's numbers.
What you're telling me is it's the economics.
The only thing standing between you and getting rid of 50,000 books is how much it's going to cost.
If the price was right, you'd say it's okay.
Oh, I think so.
And how would you pick the 50,000 books?
Which 50,000 books would you pick out of your six million?
Well, okay.
For example, in the storage facility, naturally you have to pick the ones that are no longer protected by copyright.
I would probably pick the ones that have not circulated.
I would be real safe to say in the last 15 years.
And when you say not circulated, you mean so much as one person checking it out.
Right, right.
Can you differentiate between use and circulation?
No.
Yeah, I can.
I do.
I can, you know, in my own life.
Well, these are books that haven't seen the storage facility.
This is an academic library, so we can't measure them.
See, in the storage facility, it's closed stacks.
See, so we know who, actually, the book has moved out the shelf because the faculty do not go into the stack area.
It's a closed stack in the storage facility.
You use the words concurrently, use them without separation, use and circulate.
That's my question.
Hello?
Well, I left my card on the card.
It used to be that the library got money based upon the circulation tables.
And we started yelling and screaming about that.
Yeah, no, we don't do that.
I use use as my word, not circulate.
You use the two words interchangeably.
That's all the manscaped.
Only in the beer facility, Toby.
Because, see, there, here we have open stacks.
So we have a lot of people go into the stack area.
And they'll take books off the shelf and sit down at the table and read them right there.
That's what I call use.
Yeah, right, right.
But see, in the beer facility, if they want a book, it has to be retrieved, okay?
So we know, we keep a record, that book was actually called for.
It may be only used in the library there at the beer facility, and it's not checked out.
I'm following all that.
Don't y'all tell me that I'm giving you my email address.
Well, you may have several questions after you.
It's bouncing from circulation to use, and for me, use is a higher form.
Yeah, that's fax, email, phone, address.
Okay, good.
That's more than information I have on my card.
But let's go back.
You said you'd do a... Would you want to... We didn't want him finish what he was saying.
No.
This is interesting.
You don't want to finish?
Yeah, you read all that stuff.
Okay.
We said you'd have a group, maybe.
Maybe you'd have somebody study the books, copyright, and then we stopped.
So let's go.
We're on.
Great.
Thank you.
Thanks very much.
Okay.
Thank you.
Wonderful.
All right.
Okay, I'll go back and talk about how I would determine.
What I wrote is just to be in the safe side.
Yeah, I would consult with the faculty and tell them what I plan to do.
These books have not been used in 15 years, therefore I want to digitize them and save space and also make them accessible to the world, so to speak, which they cannot, they're not accessible if they had to come here.
And then what would you do with the 50,000 books?
I would sell them, yeah.
I would put them in book sales.
So there's no particular... Or give them to another... There's no attachment, then, that you don't feel any special attachment, then, to the printed book.
I mean, I think... No, but that's going a little bit too far.
I'm a strong believer in collections, in special collections.
And I also, there's just something about a book.
You know, and the computer won't do this for some time, but even the olio from the smell of it.
I mean, that turns me on.
Maybe that turns you off the doctor.
No.
It turns me on a very, very way.
No, but when I go on.
Especially his own books.
Right.
When I go into special collections, and see what my projections are, and I've done some writing on this, about that we're going to have a demise of the reference book as we know it.
You know, like book books.
Who's who in America?
And his books, you know, they're going to be.
And I think that's correct, by the way.
Mm-hmm.
Mike Keller at Stanford, you know, points out, he said, you get some monographs that cost, you're only going to sell three or four hundred of them at best.
They're going to cost you two, three hundred dollars to buy.
And in the sciences, they're going to be obsolete the day they come out.
Doesn't it make better sense to make them available here?
Go to what you want, download print that you want.
The graphics of the color now are such that they're extraordinary.
It's awfully hard.
To argue with that, it's awfully hard to argue with putting the OED online.
I know.
In the words of Christophageism, the Encyclopedia Britannica.
You know, I mean, you have to acknowledge there are certain areas that it makes sense.
That's right.
Well, whatever.
You know, you can't be a total Luddite here in some of this stuff.
I'd like to see all the reference books.
I would like to see journals.
I think someday we will see the demise of the journals we know of.
I think you'll go in and you'll access information on the topic.
and you have proceedings, book chapters, and so-called journals.
My concern, I think the publishers are very concerned about are they going to lose their shirts with some of the journals, because these journals are really expensive.
You know, there's almost a racket going on here whereby professors generate all this intellectual property, and then for some journals now you have to pay $200
per page in order to have your article.
So if you have a 20-page article, what is that?
What's that, $4,000?
$4,000.
You send the $4,000 into the public in order to get promoted and to get tenure.
That's right.
It's almost blackmail, isn't it?
Oh, yeah.
Then they send this.
That counts as a publication?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Journal.
Yeah, journal.
See, a journal article.
That's where most of the faculty, that's how they... It's close to a book.
It's a journal.
It's beneath a book.
For example, to... The closest thing to a book.
I added this journal.
This is the best journal in academic library, academic research life.
Yeah.
I'm the editor of that particular journal.
Now, our rejection rate is, we reject 65% of the articles that are submitted.
Now, that's a high rejection rate.
In other words, only 35% of the articles.
Can I have a copy?
Yeah, you can have a copy.
Matt, thank you.
I'm one of these people who wants everything, by the way.
Okay.
My editorial here is working with the faculty, and that pretty much articulates what I said earlier.
At one time, faculty members knew all the literature.
Now the students know what they do on the web.
But back to this story, then the publishers sell all of this property that's created by the faculty back to the universities at an enormous price.
Some journals like
The Journal of Physics is like 20,000 a year.
These are enormous prices.
How much longer can universities continue to pay all of this, you know?
So... They're supposed to share.
Well, we are sharing.
I'd like to talk a little bit about that.
Why don't you talk a little bit about that?
Okay, I know we're jumping all over the place here.
That's fine.
I like jumping.
Anyway, when I came here in 1991, I went to my provost, Gil Whittaker, and I said, the Big Ten Universities need to do something.
library-wise.
I said, we need to develop more interdependence among these, now there are 13 libraries.
Penn State is part of the Big Ten.
So, actually, it became an athletic conference, going into the library.
Right.
It's called the Committee on Institutional Cooperation, CIC.
And I mentioned to Gil, I said, we need to do something, we need to do something fast.
And he said, well, why don't you develop a strategic plan?
Which I did, and I went and made a presentation as a provost.
And they liked it.
Naturally, but to see, they can oversimplify and think they're going to save a lot of money.
We have saved some money, and I can give you some documentation on that.
Okay.
Yeah.
One of the things, for example, we are taking the Modern Language Association Bibliography here.
I'm talking about the online database.
We're sharing the other 12.
The site license.
But we're saving money.
I mean, all of us are saving money.
The University of Wisconsin is working with Baustein.
That's... Oh, Treonis.
Could you come in here for a second?
I'm trying those guys.
This guy knows exactly what he's doing.
This is our Greek papyrologist.
And Nick was interested in seeing this.
Maybe you could give a demonstration briefly or sometime.
He could pull it up maybe on his homepage.
Can he pull it up?
Maybe there's no need to.
You can have a Luke.
We have a lot of stuff at this month.
It's not appearing yet.
It will appear sometime at the beginning of December.
Okay.
But there is quite a bit online already.
That I can do it.
From samples to exhibits online.
Okay.
That I can do it.
Good.
I'm glad you came down.
Well, June actually has left a message on the machine.
Well, it's probably... We've got to copy the article for it.
You know, I have given away at least 120 copies.
And I kept...
Now, aren't you glad you did it?
Yes, yes, yes.
One of the pieces, the dean said, you better write something.
And then it appeared for a while.
And then she said, you better rewrite.
I rewrote, eventually came out last year.
Working with editors, I know.
The people keep saying that the experience alone that comes out of this article is very useful for similar projects.
This is the oldest collection we have, and it reflects how
This enabling technology can improve the human condition.
I think that when you read this, you'll have a much better appreciation of our civilization.
But I, yeah, but I think the technology... Of course, when you take all your thoughts in your face.
Well, I think it's going to help, you know, with the health and these developing countries.
It's going to help in so many ways.
And with libraries, it's just one way.
Of course, when you have a scholar that comes in and wants to look at these papyrus,
Are you going to allow that scholar to look at the original, or are you going to restrict them to the stuff that's digitized?
No.
We actually use the digital project as a pointer to our actual collection, because ultimately a scholar who is interested in deciphering reading this ancient text, we can start from the screen, of course, because we have very high resolution images, but you have to go ultimately at some stage to the original.
That's right.
This is a concern that some people have, that maybe by putting this... You wonder about the intellectual honesty of it, you know.
Because, as you know, you can manipulate things.
At the same time, you disseminate this information so widely.
That was not possible before.
Before, the only way to do it is to have people write to you to ask for a black and white photograph, which can be very expensive and time-consuming.
Time-consuming is actually the most important factor in our work.
Now, all this, of course, has started into a consortium project.
It's not only the University of Michigan.
We started the whole idea of coming here.
So are you embarked on digitizing the whole collection?
The whole?
Well, we are working in phases.
Phase one will deal with everything that has been published so far.
Published by that means we have started the content of it.
It has appeared in some journals.
So then you published because, therefore, now you're digitizing a published copy?
Yeah.
No, no, no, we're authentic.
How do you scan it if they're fragmentary?
Well, that's after work and after it has been assembled, reassembled by the scholars.
We are hiring experts to do this thing.
So what we do is once we know where the fragments go and they're physically located there, we can scan, shoot.
But then maybe again, what if you later determine that that's not where the fragments go?
Well, you see, then physically you can do that on the screen.
You can move them around.
That's another side effect, and there are many manuscripts, especially individual papyrides, a paper like that, a contract, which when it was sold from the dealers to the various universities, in some cases, the intention was cut down by the dealer, well, to make more money.
Now, it's the only time, this is our chance, to start putting this together in a sort of virtual mode.
Does this article say that?
Well, I think it mentions that.
Yeah.
It talks a bit more about the research aspect of it and the teaching aspect of it.
You see, now we use images for teaching purposes.
Instead of having the students, you know, if you have a class of ten people— Just for the sake of my tape, could you just identify yourself?
My name is Treyanos Gagos, and I'm the associate artist of the collection.
I see.
How long have you been here?
In Ann Arbor, eight years.
Working with the collection eight years, being in this position five years.
And this is your background with Papyrus?
Yes, I am a papyrologist.
A papyrologist.
How do you feel as a papyrologist?
I mean, you really are literally going from one extreme to the other, aren't you, in terms of communications, media?
Well, you know, that's actually a sort of false impression.
If you look back in the history of scholarship, and that's something I mentioned in the article, every single effort from the moment all the ancient libraries were established,
was to preserve and copy and propagate the written work.
When they were writing on rolls, they wrote on rolls because they wanted to put as much information as possible.
When they were copying, they were copying the next generation.
We're doing the same thing, just we use different types of technology.
You know, when you go up and down the screen, what do you do?
I'm alert to that.
There are all these subtle things.
So many thousands of years have passed from the beginnings of this that we have forgotten that we are still living in the same tradition.
We just need different means to propagate this tradition, to continue this tradition.
So you have no problem with that at all?
No.
No, just things are much faster today.
You can do much more at the same time.
Very interesting.
Good.
And this is, I mean, we are thrilled that, you know, relies heavily on text.
And this is the first time, really, that we combine text, image,
and put them together.
I've been told that what he's doing here in Michigan is comparable only in one or two other places in the world.
Is that right?
Well, we started this here, and then other institutions learned from our experience.
And Duke, for instance.
Duke managed to get an NIH grant early on.
Don, is it possible that the trainers could show me some of the papyrus?
Oh, yeah, sure.
You mind?
I will be next door.
Okay.
Come by anytime.
Except for two to three when I have a meeting.
Okay, I would, just even if it's only for five minutes.
Oh, I think we'll do it now.
I'll come back.
Do you mind?
This is our reference section.
Okay.
We have everything that comes out with regard to papyrology.
So we are in the department now?
Yes, this is the reading area.
This is where people come around this table and they work.
But this space belongs to this department, basically, right?
This is papyrology, room 807.
And were you a papyrologist in Greece?
Well, this is where I got my first, first, first training.
In Greece or here?
Yeah, no, in Greece.
When I was in my final year as an undergraduate.
Where was this?
In the University of Ioannina, that's northwest, south of Albania.
For the first time, the university offered a class in papyrology.
And I took that class, and I took it at the beginning as a sort of game, you know, playing with the text.
We were starting from Xerox.
Can you imagine now a photograph of a papyrus in Xerox?
It was terrible.
What was your attraction to it?
Just the touching of history?
We had no originals.
I could make out very little about history.
As I said, it was a game in the beginning.
I took it as a challenge.
Here is a text.
Try to see if you can read something out of it.
That's how it started.
The following year, the Greek government announced a program with scholarships for my field, for papyrology, and I had to take exams.
It was competitive.
I managed to get a scholarship, and then a year later, I took a year off, I went to England at the University of Durham, that's northeast.
D-U-R-H-A-M?
Durham?
Yeah, like Durham here, the sister city.
I'm from Massachusetts, so I'm not that familiar with Michigan.
This is where I got a PhD.
I worked on materials sent out there from Oxford, from a particular site in New York, the Oxiricus papyrus.
And then in my final year, during the PhD, I got involved in the building of a textual database that ran actually between Duke University and Durham, North Carolina.
What's this word?
Oxyrhynchus.
Oxyrhynchus is an... O-X-Y-R-H-Y-N-C-H-U-S, yeah.
Yeah, this is a very famous sign in Egypt, where the British excavated the trash piles, basically, of the city, and they discovered it.
Like the Ganesias?
They're the same thing?
I'm sorry?
Like the Hebrew, the Jewish, where they called them a Ganesia, Ganesia, where they buried all the papers and stuff?
No, this was just the trash.
And that was at that close?
This is where the city used to throw its trash.
O-X-Y...
R-H-Y-N-C-H-U-S.
That's a place.
That's the name of the place?
That's a city, yes.
And this city is where again?
Yes.
Close to what you might want to call Middle Egypt.
Actually, have there been any books written about this?
Oh, yeah.
If I wanted to read about this.
About Oxyrincus.
Well, actually, if you want to read generally about paparology.
You mentioned it there, right?
Oh, yeah.
There's a very good book.
This is a very basic introduction.
He actually talks quite a bit.
And this has been published by Oxford University Press.
What year?
Oh, well, there are all sorts of re-editions.
68.
So, of course, you're telling me about this place where all these papyri were found.
Is that right?
Yes.
Well, not all, but I mean a very large number of papyri.
What kinds of things are there?
Very mundane things like that?
Oh, easy papyri?
Yeah.
Anything you can imagine, from literature, known, unknown, unidentified, to daily documents.
Here's a good example.
That's almost the mother of the Lord.
When was this place discovered?
This was discovered in the late 19th century.
Uh-huh.
About a hundred years ago.
From Homer.
Homer?
Really?
Have they found any unknown things?
Daily documents.
How about in terms of literary things?
A lot.
A lot of literature that did not survive to us through the Middle Ages.
How come I haven't heard of this place?
Different literary tastes.
That's a serious question.
And actually, this site, a Greek name for an Egyptian site, and another site called Karanis, K-A-R-A-N-I-S.
K-A-R-A-N-I-S, okay.
Which was excavated by the University of Michigan.
Where was this?
Between 1924 and 1935.
Okay.
Are the most promising sites in the United States, I write.
Now, in Oxford, they dug the trash piles and they got the fire out.
In Karan, the University of Michigan excavated the actual town.
Wow.
And they had plants of the houses, streets, papyri found wherever, in any kind of structure, any street, and archaeological objects.
Actually, I'm working on a fellowship this year and trying to put together all these different types of evidence on the weather.
Now, would you say material here is better than to be found in the actual source of this material?
I'm sorry?
Would you say that the quality of the material, in terms of comprehensiveness, is better here than it is to be found, say, at the sites where they were found in Egypt or Greece?
Well, most of the papyri, most collections, were built from purchases from dealers.
I see.
you know, the Egyptian farmers would go to the old sites to remove dirty fertilizing fields.
And along with that, they were removing papyri objects.
When the first Europeans went there with Napoleon, you know, the French, 1812, I think it was the exhibition.
They found the Rosetta Stone.
Well, they are the ones who actually realized when they brought back this material in Europe, yeah, this is the way the scholars realized that this is very important.
We cannot just throw it away.
Because that's what
the farmers were doing.
And this is when the first dealers, European dealers, went there.
Now, if you have purchases from dealers, in most cases, in many cases, you don't know where the fire comes from.
They come from a village.
Sure, we know by name, but in these cases, we know the actual site.
We know where exactly it was located.
Now, these are the annual reports of, these are the annual publications.
Why?
I could probably find this at Harvard, I would bet, huh?
Yes.
I'm sure Harvard has everything.
Go ahead, I've got the tape on, so you can talk.
Yes, and here we have, you know, the, I was talking to you about the Karanis that we have in our collection.
Yeah.
This is one text.
This entire volume contains one text.
Really?
They have a whole text?
This is the most complete tax roll we have from the ancient world, from one village.
6,000 lines.
Wow.
What's the title of that book?
Doctorals from Koranis.
There we spell K-A-R-A-N-I-S-H.
And this is in the Michigan papyrus.
University of Michigan.
It's out of frame.
Crickle-woman memoirs.
Is there all this stuff going online now?
I imagine.
No.
The British will have to make their own decision.
Our stuff is going to go online.
The Columbia stuff is going to go online.
And more.
And these are pretty old, too.
And more, yes.
Most of them are out of print, actually.
We will have a test on the web around the beginning, hopefully the beginning of December, with volume three.
This one.
which is titled the Miscellaneous Papyri, Winter, W-I-N-C, as a person.
Again, in the Michigan Papyri series.
That's called the Michigan Papyri.
Michigan Papyri.
That's volume three.
So how did it happen that Michigan came to be so preeminent?
Through Francis W. Kelsey, who was a professor of flat in here.
No, no.
On State Street.
Did you go on State Street?
I just really am.
You have Angel Hall on the one side, and then the Kelsey Museum of Archaeology.
Oh, the Kelsey Museum of Archaeology is here.
And Francis W. Kelsey was a professor of Latin here at the turn of the century, and he traveled extensively.
He went to Egypt, too, and he saw what was happening, and he knew that the Europeans were building up their collections.
His name was Francis Kelsey?
Francis W. Kelsey.
K-E-L-S-E-Y.
Yes.
And he started building the collection.
And then 75 cents.
So it's a joke, right?
This is a room within a room.
OK.
What do we call this room?
Environmental cleaner.
OK.
It's a safety box.
Well, it's not in the safety box.
We call it the Dear Vault.
Steady humidity at 45% to 46%.
Temperature of 65 degrees Fahrenheit.
This is duplicating basically the conditions in the desert.
This is how they survive.
Any other place in the world they would... Right?
And this is the only collection that has this kind of furniture.
Most collections don't.
We have not seen any... There's nothing like this in Greece?
There's nothing like this in England?
No.
There's nothing like this anywhere in the United States.
Or anywhere in Europe?
Greece doesn't have very big papyrus collections.
Papyrus didn't survive in this.
It's too humid.
I don't know what's everywhere.
Let me survive there, right?
Nothing really doesn't.
You can see why we call it the beer vault.
We call it the what vault?
The beer vault.
The beer.
Beer.
Like beer?
Oh, like we drink beer.
Yes.
So, all the locals can see around here.
It's a huge collection.
We honestly still don't know how much we can.
Although, we've been researching for 75 years.
We're looking at the log class of 1890 collections.
The three first lockers contain mounds of iron guns.
We do this to prevent damage, also for display purposes and for research purposes.
The text roll I showed to you of the published book, all this, all this, about 105 frames are one text.
Is that that text?
Yeah.
Look at that, huh?
Text roll, Karanis, K-R-A-N-I-S, 172-173AD.
How did you determine the age?
We know it.
It's specified.
Most documentary texts, daily texts, are dated by the emperor.
Really?
So we know exactly where they were written, the exact date, month date.
We're looking at something here that's, what, you know, 1,700, 1,800 years old, right?
It looks like it could have been written.
What was the ink?
Very basic.
Soot from the chimney in water.
And how did they make the quill?
Were these a quill for a pen?
Oh, just the reed.
They sharpened the reed, and then just
And these are recording what?
Tax things?
These are recording in detail all the mails of this village.
All the what?
All the mails?
Yeah, women in the village.
That had to pay all sorts of different types of... And what language is this?
This is all in Greek.
And it goes... Can you read this?
Yes.
You see, this is the 14th day of the month, whatever the month is.
It's a ledger.
It's a day book.
And then they list the names of the people that paid.
And on the right here, they record the exact amount that each person paid.
So the name, an individual's name is here.
Can you read one for me?
Can you see one?
No.
The name of this guy is Heraklas.
And he's Apator, fatherless.
It's a very interesting case.
Where does it say fatherless?
Here, Apator.
He has no father.
So why is that important, do you think?
It's very important because the father probably...
was not known.
And in this case, when they don't know the name of the father in official records, they give the name of the mother, and that's what we have here, Me, abbreviated.
His mother being, and I think this is Tao Nof, and it's abbreviated.
Oh, Nofris, maybe.
That was the name of the mother.
And then here you have eight drachmas.
This is a single like S, this is a single for drachma, and eta in Greek, the counting system in Greek, is 8.
The writing is remarkably good, isn't it?
The quality of the writing.
I was just talking about how well it's preserved.
I mean, these were literary people, weren't they?
Yeah.
Well, this was done by the tax collectors.
Tax collectors were normally rather well-educated people.
We have a suspicion we know where it was found.
We know the actual structure, because this was not excavated.
It was purchased locally.
During the excavations.
That particular item you just showed me?
Yes.
Not all of these frames?
That particular item that you just pulled out?
No, all these frames.
All of these frames?
They are all one text.
But how were they found?
This was 106 feet long.
This was found as one scroll?
Yes.
And it survived?
Now who broke it up?
It was cut down here.
For mounting purposes, you can see.
So the scroll went in this direction?
Yes.
And how did they read?
Did they read from left to right?
From left to right.
As I said, when it first came here, it was 106 feet long.
Wow.
We had to go into the records to find out what they did to do their records, how it was preserved.
At the time, it was thought that the best way to keep this was to cut it down into sections.
Did they do that today?
I don't know.
I'm actually working on another row right now.
that is still rolled.
Here?
It's not as long, but it's very important.
Recently acquired, or has been here all these years?
It was from the excavations.
So we're just getting around to it now?
Yeah.
And this is just the process of the next in line, is that right?
That's fascinating.
Yeah.
But most of the papyrus kept in boxes like this.
And look at this.
So this material would not have survived.
I mean, this is a climatic
Yes, yes.
And this stuff was just taken out and dumped, in many cases, at the other sites you're telling me about.
Well, in most cases, you know, the people, they would use the papyrus, they would write them to one side and write them to the other side, and then, that was it.
So, they were recording payments, but there was no intent to keep the stuff alive.
They kept them for a while, but then, after the expiration of those dates, the stuff would be thrown away.
That's right.
Do they tell us much about ancient life?
Well, if we know something in detail about the ancient life today, about daily life in the ancient world, we know things like the papyri.
Until they discovered the papyri, a century ago, what we knew about daily life in the ancient world was based completely on literature.
And, of course, there is a fictional element.
That's right.
And also the literature is only going to focus on a certain segment of the society.
And it's written by one person.
It has all these limitations.
So inscriptions in papyri actually have contributed very heavily to knowing how, you know, everyday people think about this.
And what was your intention when you were studying at university?
What were your plans?
Well, I had no plans.
I was just, I took it as a challenge.
Were you attending on a career as a scholar?
No, you were just studying that.
I did.
Well, in a field like this, you would study paparology.
You had to continue working.
It was very hard to switch after that.
It was very hard to what?
To switch, to get into something else.
I mean, we are in the first place classicists, you know, philologists.
And we do part of our work now, teaching the classics.
But in terms of research,
This is our material.
We're trained to do this.
And you're at a great place for this, obviously.
Yes.
And there are very few of us in the world.
So you have a fraternity of a few, I gather.
Yeah.
Let me show you just that.
Let's get our papyrus in a box.
You can see how flexible they still are.
They still are.
Here's a cake.
This is very fragmentary.
Look at it.
How is it kept together?
Of course, it's a reed, right?
It's a big reed, 12, 13 feet.
The papyrus has very large stems, so what they do is they extract stripes, fibers, which they place horizontal liver very closely.
They pound strips.
Strips, yes.
And then they pound the two layers that cells break, and that's what keeps the two layers together, and they polish it very heavily.
Yes, they did right on both sides.
This is what I call recycling in the ancient world.
I don't hold it, but what are these holes, or that's just natural deterioration, I gather?
Well, maybe wormholes.
You know, worms like papyrus, because that's a plant.
It tastes good.
There are reports that papyrus was even edible in the ancient world.
People would have it.
They would make shoes out of it.
They would make boats out of it.
Does it still grow?
It's like a weed over there?
It is.
It's all over the place.
It goes to Egypt along the Nile.
That's papyrus.
Of course, the story was when they found Pergamum and they had the big argument with Alexandria,
They stopped the exportation of papyrus, so they improved parchment.
It's a great story, but we don't know that.
We don't know to what extent that's true.
Except that parchment does mean it's a medieval Latin phrase from Pergamum, so it certainly does have that provenance.
No, I accept this theory that there are people that don't.
Except the parchment was in use long before Pergamum came along.
I mean, the Jews used it, the Persians used it.
Right, but it was not used extensively because it's more expensive.
You have to kill many animals.
Yeah, not only that, this stuff wasn't meant for the 80s, right?
Yes.
When you do parchment, it is meant for the ages, I think.
Parchment is also more durable, and it doesn't deteriorate as fast as the virus.
I mean, if you have a papyrus roll a hundred and sixty feet long, you want to get to the end of it.
You have to roll them all the time, right?
Well, through that process, however, the papyrus doesn't do damage.
I suspect that was a very serious reason for considering alternative writing.
Do you have any clay tablets here?
We had pot charts, but most of that stuff has been returned to Egypt.
That was part of the excavations in Karan.
The deal with the Egyptian government was to
keep them here for 30 years, keep all the materials here, and then return whatever the agreement was at the time, X amount of them.
What would you say are the oldest papyrus that you have?
The oldest we have here is from around the 12th century BC.
It's a copy of the Book of the Dead.
And that's here?
Yes, that's here.
Actually, it's not right here, right now, but it's on display in the Kelsey Museum right now.
How about that other roll?
Is that here, the one that you're working with?
That's still a roll?
I'm afraid to touch that.
Okay, can you show it to me without touching it?
You don't have to touch it.
I'd just like to see it.
Actually, part of that has been mounted in glass.
Don't open it.
I can just see it.
We use paper to protect it.
And then it takes the shape of the paper.
So it rolls inside of this and it rolls around.
But this is part of it.
And where was this recovered?
It was in Karanis again.
That's quite a sight then.
Oh yes.
That sight produced about 5,000 individual papyrates.
And where again was that?
Is that Egypt did you say as well?
All the papyri that we had here come from Egypt.
And papyrus was preserved primarily in Egypt because of the climate conditions.
I mean we have papyri from the caves in Israel.
We have papyri from Herculaneum in Israel.
Carbonized.
That's all because of the eruption.
And we have very simply papaya also from Petra in Jordan.
Again, carbonized next to Vincent King Church.
I'm actually working with that program.
I go to Jordan every year, every summer.
So is this exciting for you?
It's more than a job.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I don't take it as a job.
No.
It's what I've been doing for the rest of my life.
Makes a pose.
Thank you.
This is great.
This is a treat.
And these books here are old?
These are not part of our collection, actually.
These are part of special collections, but we're always going to mention special collections.
And these are Islamic manuscripts, 18th and 19th centuries, maybe 17th too.
And we have also a very small collection of Western manuscripts.
And by that we mean manuscripts in Greek and Latin, or even parchment and paper after the 9th century.
You seem to know where everything is, though.
You can put your name right on.
Vulgate Bible here, 13th century.
Now, this is an original book.
Look at the vinyl.
Wow.
What are we looking at here?
This is a Coptic manuscript.
This is probably 7th or 8th century.
My God.
Is that the original scrap?
This is the original scrap.
And I don't want to open it.
No, I don't play well.
What is the text?
I don't know.
I have to check it out.
I've seen it.
I expect it's Christian.
It's probably the Bible.
Oh, my goodness.
This is a nice Islamic manuscript.
This is the Koran.
Look at that.
Look at that illumination there, huh?
Many of these manuscripts, you know, this is a holy book.
And how old do you estimate this?
Like six months, this was bought at auction, I gather.
Oh, it's very possible.
Many of this is rare.
It's on paper, so I suspect this could be... Look at that.
This could be 14th century.
Wow.
It's not early, eh?
That is... This is unbelievable here.
Yeah.
Michigan MS-248, just for the sake of my tape, the 248.
That's the one in the original binding of object manuscripts.
This is again from Egypt, this one.
Most of these were purchased in Cairo.
Look at the strap though, even the strap.
So that's like a carrying case, it's almost like a purse in a way, it's almost like a shirt.
It's possible that people were carrying this in churches, you know, what they would get from the service.
Here's another.
This is in Greek.
This is again on paper and later.
Okay, good.
Beautiful.
Well, that's great.
Okay.
I don't think I feel much of your time.
And you can see what we have, you know, electronically.
So, when you came here, have they already embarked on this digital program?
That's my baby.
It's my baby.
So when you came here, you didn't even expect that this would be the... No, and I was not.
I just started working computers.
Were you enthusiastic about it?